One of the things that might help
speed up your learning algorithm,
is to slowly reduce your
learning rate over time.
We call this learning rate decay.
Let's see how you can implement this.
Let's start with an example of
why you might want to implement
learning rate decay.
Suppose you're implementing
mini-batch gradient descent,
with a reasonably small mini-batch.
Maybe a mini-batch has just 64,
128 examples.
Then as you iterate,
your steps will be a little bit noisy.
And it will tend towards this minimum
over here, but it won't exactly converge.
But your algorithm might just
end up wandering around, and
never really converge, because you're
using some fixed value for alpha.
And there's just some noise in
your different mini-batches.
But if you were to slowly reduce
your learning rate alpha,
then during the initial phases, while
your learning rate alpha is still large,
you can still have
relatively fast learning.
But then as alpha gets smaller, your steps
you take will be slower and smaller.
And so you end up oscillating in
a tighter region around this minimum,
rather than wandering far away,
even as training goes on and on.
So the intuition behind slowly
reducing alpha, is that maybe
during the initial steps of learning, you
could afford to take much bigger steps.
But then as learning approaches converges,
then having a slower learning rate
allows you to take smaller steps.
So here's how you can
implement learning rate decay.
Recall that one epoch is one pass,
Through the data, right?
So if you have a training set as follows,
maybe you break it up into
different mini-batches.
Then the first pass through the training
set is called the first epoch,
and then the second pass is
the second epoch, and so on.
So one thing you could do,
is set your learning rate alpha = 1
/ 1 + a parameter,
which I'm going to call the decay rate,
Times the epoch-num.
And this is going to be times some
initial learning rate alpha 0.
Note that the decay rate here
becomes another hyper-parameter,
which you might need to tune.
So here's a concrete example.
If you take several epochs, so
several passes through your data.
If alpha 0 = 0.2, and the decay-rate = 1,
then during your first epoch,
alpha will be 1 / 1 + 1 * alpha 0.
So your learning rate will be 0.1.
That's just evaluating this formula,
when the decay-rate is equal to 1, and
the the epoch-num is 1.
On the second epoch,
your learning rate decays to 0.67.
On the third, 0.5,
on the fourth, 0.4, and so on.
And feel free to evaluate more
of these values yourself.
And get a sense that, as a function of
your epoch number, your learning rate
gradually decreases, right,
according to this formula up on top.
So if you wish to use learning rate decay,
what you can do,
is try a variety of values of
both hyper-parameter alpha 0.
As well as this decay
rate hyper-parameter,
and then try to find
the value that works well.
Other than this formula for
learning rate decay,
there are a few other
ways that people use.
For example,
this is called exponential decay.
Where alpha is equal to
some number less than 1,
such as 0.95 times epoch-num,
times alpha 0.
So this will exponentially
quickly decay your learning rate.
Other formulas that people
use are things like alpha
= some constant / epoch-num
square root times alpha 0.
Or some constant k,
another hyper-parameter,
over the mini-batch number t,
square rooted, times alpha 0.
And sometimes you also see people use
a learning rate that decreases in
discrete steps.
Wherefore some number of steps,
you have some learning rate,
and then after a while you
decrease it by one half.
After a while by one half.
And so this is a discrete staircase.
So so far, we've talked about using
some formula to govern how alpha,
the learning rate, changes over time.
One other thing that people sometimes do,
is manual decay.
And so if you're training
just one model at a time, and
if your model takes many hours,
or even many days to train.
What some people will do,
is just watch your model as it's
training over a large number of days.
And then manually say, it looks
like the learning rate slowed down,
I'm going to decrease alpha a little bit.
Of course this works,
this manually controlling alpha,
really tuning alpha by hand,
hour by hour, or day by day.
This works only if you're training
only a small number of models, but
sometimes people do that as well.
So now you have a few more options for
how to control the learning rate alpha.
Now, in case you're thinking, wow,
this is a lot of hyper-parameters.
How do I select amongst all
these different options?
I would say, don't worry about it for now.
In next week, we'll talk more about how to
systematically choose hyper-parameters.
For me, I would say that learning
rate decay is usually lower down on
the list of things I try.
Setting alpha, just a fixed value of
alpha, and getting that to be well tuned,
has a huge impact.
Learning rate decay does help.
Sometimes it can really
help speed up training, but
it is a little bit lower down my list
in terms of the things I would try.
But next week,
when we talk about hyper-parameter tuning,
you see more systematic ways to
organize all of these hyper-parameters.
And how to efficiently
search amongst them.
So that's it for learning rate decay.
Finally, I was also going to talk
a little bit about local optima, and
saddle points, in neural networks.
So you can have a little bit better
intuition about the types of
optimization problems your optimization
algorithm is trying to solve,
when you're trying to train
these neural networks.
Let's go on to the next video to see that.